Chore: Add Linter documentation (#3950)
TobikoData/sqlmesh: docs/concepts/linter.md

# Linter

> Linting enables you to validate the model definition, ensuring it adheres to best practices. When a new [plan](plans.md) is created, each model is checked against a set of built-in and user-defined rules to verify that its attributes comply with the defined standards; This improves code quality, consistency, and helps to detect issues early in the development cycle.

Author: > This isn't plan-specific, right? Linting happens whenever the project is loaded.

Yeah, I also mention elsewhere that this happens during loading but I suspect that most users associate that with `sqlmesh plan` since it's the main command they'd run; Not sure if `loading` as a stage is brought up as often.

> Linting enables you to validate the model definition, ensuring it adheres to best practices. When a new [plan](plans.md) is created, each model is checked against a set of built-in and user-defined rules to verify that its attributes comply with the defined standards; This improves code quality, consistency, and helps to detect issues early in the development cycle.

Reviewer: You could phrase this simply as "when a project is loaded in SQLMesh" to avoid ambiguities and terms that may not be clear.

@sungchun12 thoughts?

> Linting enables you to validate the model definition, ensuring it adheres to best practices. When a new [plan](plans.md) is created, each model is checked against a set of built-in and user-defined rules to verify that its attributes comply with the defined standards; This improves code quality, consistency, and helps to detect issues early in the development cycle.

Author: > You could phrase this simply as "when a project is loaded in SQLMesh" to avoid ambiguities and terms that may not be clear.

That looks cool yeah, still wondering if the stages are documented enough for the casual user, Sung's input would be helpful here.

For more information regarding linter configuration visit the relevant [guide here](../guides/configuration.md).

# Rules

> Each rule is responsible for detecting a specific issue or pattern within a model. Rules are defined as classes that implement the logic for validation by subclassing `Rule` (redacted form):

Reviewer: What does "redacted form" mean here?

```suggestion
Each rule is responsible for detecting a specific issue or pattern in a model. Rules are defined as classes that implement the logic for validation by subclassing `Rule` (redacted form):
```

Author: > What does "redacted form" mean here?

I wanted to provide the general gist of `Rule` without copy-pasting code per se, since a lot of the code would be implementation details that are bound to change. If some users want to take that a step further, they can visit the source code.

Reviewer 2: If that's the case, replace it with "quick snippets" and add a hyperlink to see the full source code.

Reviewer: I think "(redacted form)" is unnecessary here, I was confused when I read it.

Another way to phrase this could be:

"Rules are defined as classes that implement the logic for validation. Each rule needs to inherit from the base `Rule` class: [...]"

Reviewer: Even better yeah, +1 to hyperlinking so that we don't risk this section getting stale if it's an interface that users need to follow.

```Python3
class Rule:
    """The base class for a rule."""

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def check_model(self, model: Model) -> t.Optional[RuleViolation]:
        """The evaluation function that'll check for a violation of this rule."""

    @property
    def summary(self) -> str:
        """A summary of what this rule checks for."""
        return self.__doc__ or ""

    def violation(self, violation_msg: t.Optional[str] = None) -> RuleViolation:
        """Create a RuleViolation instance for this rule"""
        return RuleViolation(rule=self, violation_msg=violation_msg or self.summary)

```

Thus, each `Rule` can be broken down to its vital components:
- The name (or code) of the rule is defined as its class name in lowercase.
- The core logic is implemented in `Rule::check_model(...)` which can analyze any `Model` attribute.
- If an issue is detected, a `RuleViolation` object should be returned with the proper context. This can be created manually or through the `Rule::violation()` helper.
- A short explanation of the rule's purpose should be added in the form of a class docstring or by subclassing `Rule::summary`.

## Built-in

> SQLMesh comes with a set of predefined rules which check for potential SQL errors or enforce stylistic opinions. An example of the latter the `NoSelectStar` rule which prohibits users from writing `SELECT *` in the outer-most select:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQLMesh comes with a set of predefined rules which check for potential SQL errors or enforce stylistic opinions. An example of the latter is the `NoSelectStar` rule, which prohibits users from writing `SELECT *` in the outer-most select:
```

```Python
class NoSelectStar(Rule):
    """Query should not contain SELECT * on its outer most projections, even if it can be expanded."""

    def check_model(self, model: Model) -> t.Optional[RuleViolation]:
        if not isinstance(model, SqlModel):
            return None

        return self.violation() if model.query.is_star else None
```

The list of all built-in rules is the following:

| Name                                 | Check       | Explanation
|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ambiguousorinvalidcolumns            | Correctness | The optimizer was unable to trace or found duplicate columns                                           |
| invalidselectstarexpansion           | Correctness | The optimizer was unable to expand the top-level `SELECT *`                                            |
| noselectstar                         | Stylistic   | The query's top-level selection should not be `SELECT *`, even if it can be expanded by the optimizer |

## User defined rules

> Users can implement their own custom rules in a similar fashion. For that matter, SQLMesh will load any subclass of `Rule` under the `linter/` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can implement their own custom rules in a similar fashion. SQLMesh will load any subclass of `Rule` under the `linter/` directory.
```

> For instance, if an organization wanted to ensure all models are owned by an engineer, one solution would be to implement the following check:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, if an organization wanted to ensure all models have an owner, one solution would be to implement the following check:
```

For more information regarding linter configuration visit the relevant [guide here](../guides/configuration.md).

# Rules

Each rule is responsible for detecting a specific issue or pattern within a model. Rules are defined as classes that implement the logic for validation by subclassing `Rule` (redacted form):

```Python3
class Rule:
    """The base class for a rule."""

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def check_model(self, model: Model) -> t.Optional[RuleViolation]:
        """The evaluation function that'll check for a violation of this rule."""

    @property
    def summary(self) -> str:
        """A summary of what this rule checks for."""
        return self.__doc__ or ""

    def violation(self, violation_msg: t.Optional[str] = None) -> RuleViolation:
        """Create a RuleViolation instance for this rule"""
        return RuleViolation(rule=self, violation_msg=violation_msg or self.summary)

```

> Thus, each `Rule` can be broken down to it's vital components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, each `Rule` can be broken down to its vital components:
```

> - The name (or code) of the rule is it's class name in lowercase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The name (or code) of the rule is its class name in lowercase.
```
